No doubt every one of us at one time or another has faced a discouraging situation.
Really, no one is immune from discouragement.
This feeling may last for a day or two, and then subside, or it might last longer.
What can cause us to be discouraged?
We watched our publications index lists over 20 factors that can contribute to discouragement.
Some of these are another's conduct, what someone did or didn't do that disappointed us.
Problems in our congregation, feeling inadequate, our own personal failures, what we've done
or failed to do, health problems, and loss of privileges.
There are ever so many things that can cause us to be downhearted.
Even the fact that we are discouraged can be discouraging.
We feel guilty for being discouraged.
Here's the good news, we're in good company.
I'm very prominent and faithful servants of Jehovah mentioned in the Bible have been discouraged.
Moses became so discouraged over the complaints of the Israelites that he said to God,
please kill me right now.
Rebecca was so distressed because her son Esau married pagan women.
She told her husband, I said, I am disgusted with my life.
Yes, family situations can cause discouragement.
David was tormented by his sins.
At Psalm 513, he wrote, I am well aware of my transgressions and my sin is always before me.
Our mistakes can weigh us down.
Jeremiah felt so discouraged by the opposition, ridicule, and apathy he met up with that he
told himself, I'm not going to make mention of Jehovah, and I will speak no more in his name.
Yes, poor results in the ministry can discourage us.
The Apostle Paul, frankly admitted in Romans 724 and 25 that he struggled against sinful tendencies.
At times, he felt miserable over this conflict.
He said, miserable man that I am, who will rescue me from the body undergoing this death.
Faithful men and women faced discouraging circumstances in the past and so do we.
Discouragement is a part of life in this system.
We should expect it.
Yet it's important to consider how we view discouragement.
Do we view ourselves as helpless victims of discouragement and let ourselves sink into a
quagmire of despair and self-pity or do we view discouragement as an enemy that we must fight against?
We easily recognize that feelings of pride, selfishness, envy, and such things are enemies.
We battle against these bad feelings.
We don't want them to erode our faith or gain a foothold on our personality.
Yet sometimes we may yield all too willingly to discouragement.
Why is this dangerous?
Please read with me Proverbs 2410.
If you become discouraged in the day of distress, your strength will be meager.
Did you note the reason why we must fight discouragement?
What do Proverbs 2410 tell us will happen if we allow a day of distress to discourage us?
We'll lose our strength.
Yes, discouragement can drain us of our spiritual, mental, emotional, and even physical strength.
And what can happen if we lose our strength?
We can lose our enthusiasm for the truth.
We may lose interest in prayer or in personal study.
We can slack off in attending meetings.
We can develop coldness toward our brothers.
Our zeal for evangelizing can weaken.
We may even want to give up.
We don't want any of those things to happen to us.
Do we brothers?
How then do we fight and defeat discouragement?
Discouragement is a feeling, an emotion.
What causes feelings or emotions?
An article entitled Negative Emotions, Can You Overcome Them,
was published in the October 8th, 1992, awake.
This article didn't discuss serious cases of depression that may have a medical or physical cause,
such as a disease, a reaction to toxins, medications, nutritional deficiencies,
allergens, hormonal problems, or bipolar disorder.
Rather, it discussed how to overcome moments of discouragement, like the temporary day
of distress mentioned in Proverbs 2410.
Under the subheading, we can control our thinking.
It stated this.
Many who work in the field of mental health,
maintain that our feelings are caused by our thoughts.
It's been said that you cannot experience a feeling without first experiencing a thought.
So then, feeling discouraged isn't always the situation that we face,
but the negative thoughts that we have about the situation.
The first step then in fighting discouragement is to identify the negative thoughts.
Sometimes we say that we have a train of thought.
It means we have a series of thoughts that lead to a certain conclusion or destination,
if you will.
Now, imagine yourself getting on a literal railroad or subway train.
Soon you realize you're on the wrong train.
It's taking you to a place you do not want to go to.
What do you do?
Do you stay on the train all the way to the wrong destination?
Of course not.
No, you get off that train at the very next station.
But what do you do next?
You switch to the right train.
Now, figuratively speaking, if you realize that your mind is getting on a train of negative thoughts
as leading to discouragement, can you get off that train?
Certainly, but you need to switch to the right train of thought that will lead you
to a peaceful state of mind. That's the key.
We need to replace negative thoughts with positive, upbuilding, spiritual thoughts.
Keeping our thinking on the right track is not going process.
Notice how the Apostle Paul put it in Ephesians 4.23.
And you should continue to be made new in your dominant mental attitude.
Do you see how Paul confirms that we are in control?
We can change how we think.
And because we're imperfect, we have to make these changes continuously.
It's not a losing battle. Jehovah has given us powerful weapons to help us make our minds
move in the right direction, his powerful word, his mighty Holy Spirit, the power of prayer,
and healthful spiritual food from his organization.
Let's consider some negative thoughts that may lead to discouragement.
Then we'll consider upbuilding, positive thoughts that help us fight discouragement.
You had a bad day. You said or did the wrong thing and you regret it.
It's become a day of distress. The thought enters your mind. I'm worthless.
That's the discouragement train. Will you continue to stay on this train of thought,
taking you to the state of discouragement? Remember, you have a choice. You can reject it.
Instead of giving in to that negative thought, you could say to yourself,
wait a minute, stop. That's not right, just because I made a mistake. Does not make me worthless
in Jehovah's eyes. He's told us that he knows that we are dust and he's merciful.
And Jesus said that not one sparrow that has fallen to the ground is forgotten by God.
And that we are worth more than many sparrows. Yes, Jehovah views me as precious.
I'll pray about this and I'm sure he'll help me not to make that mistake again. Tomorrow will be a better day.
Thank you, Jehovah. Let's take a second example.
A brother has said something quite unkind to you. This has become a day of distress.
The thought comes to your mind, how can a brother behave like that and still be in good standing?
He's not a good example. Why don't the elders do something about it?
Now that discouragement, speaking, calling for us to get on board, if we stay on that negative
train of thought, we could lose our spiritual strength. But we still have a choice.
Well, we replace those negative thoughts with positive ones. We could get our mind on a positive
track by saying to ourselves something like this. Well, that was an unkind thing for him to say.
This is not like him. Maybe my brother just had a bad day. He's as imperfect as I am. I've said
unkind things too at times and have regretted it. He's probably feeling the same way.
I remember Colossians 313 says that we must continue putting up with one another and forgiving one
another freely, even if anyone has a cause for complaint against another. Well, he has given me
a cause for complaint. But it says Jehovah has freely forgiven us. He has certainly forgiven me
countless times. No, I'm not going to allow this to ruin our relationship.
How can I help my brother? I'll pray for him. And I'll pray for myself
that I don't hold feelings of resentment in my heart.
Let's consider a third example. After years of hard work as a place of employment,
your position has been terminated. You've lost your job. It's a day of distress.
You're filled with anxious negative thoughts. How will I care for my family? What will the future
bring? Why did Jehovah allow this to happen to me? Where will this train of dark negative thoughts
lead you? Certainly, discouragement will set in and you will become spiritually weak and exhausted.
You still have a choice. You can replace those negative thoughts with thoughts such as these.
Okay, I've lost my job. What should I do? Stop serving Jehovah? No. Jesus said that we should not
be anxious over material things because Jehovah will provide if we keep his kingdom first in our lives.
He also said to keep our lives simple. You know what? There are things that we don't need.
So that's what we do. Simplify our life and do more in Jehovah's service. Jehovah promises never
to abandon us. I'll throw my burden on him and I know he'll help us make the right decisions.
Brothers, we're living in the last days of this system of things. We'll have our days of distress.
Sometimes these come because of our own imperfection or the imperfection of others.
But we also realize that the devil wants to discourage us.
Revelation 1217 tells us that Satan's great anger is directed toward those who observe the
commandments of God and have the work of bearing witness concerning Jesus. The devil will try to take
advantage of situations and problems that we face to fill us with discouraging thoughts and
drain us of our strength. Now we stand at the very threshold of the new world.
Let's fight discouragement. With all the weapons Jehovah gives us,
continue to steady God's word, making it a part of your daily life. Pray incessantly to Jehovah
for his powerful spirit. Keep close to his organization. God has promised to give us the victory.
Fearlessly, we join in repeating Paul's words at Philippians 413.
For all things, I have the strength through the one who gives me power.